Albert Einstein was a German-born theoretical physicist who is widely held to be one of the greatest and most influential scientists of all time. Best known for developing the theory of relativity, he also made important contributions to quantum mechanics, and was thus a central figure in the revolutionary reshaping of the scientific understanding of nature that modern physics accomplished in the first decades of the twentieth century. His mass-energy equivalence formula E = mc2, which arises from relativity theory, has been called the world's most famous equation. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect, the latter being pivotal in the establishment of quantum theory.

Born in the German Empire, Einstein moved to Switzerland in 1895, forgoing his German citizenship the following year as he resolved to be stateless. In 1897, at the age of 17, he enrolled in the mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Swiss Federal polytechnic school in Zurich, graduating in 1900. In 1901 he acquired Swiss citizenship, which he kept for his entire life, and in 1903 he secured a permanent position at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern. In 1905, he submitted a successful PhD dissertation to the University of Zurich. In 1914 he moved to Berlin in order to join the Prussian Academy of Sciences and the Humboldt University of Berlin. In 1917 he became director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics; he also became a German citizen again, this time Prussian.

In 1933, while Einstein was visiting the United States, Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany. Einstein, who had always been outspoken about politics, immediately renounced his German citizenship and emigrated to the United States to escape the persecution of Jews in Germany under Hitler. He settled in Princeton, New Jersey, where he continued working until he retired in 1945. Shortly before his death, he signed the Russell-Einstein Manifesto, which highlighted the danger of nuclear weapons.

Einstein's work is also known for its influence on the philosophy of science. His special theory of relativity was published in 1905 and his general theory of relativity was published in 1915. The general theory has often been described as the most important work in the history of physics. In 1999 Einstein was named Time magazine's Person of the Century.

Einstein was born on 14 March 1879 in the city of Ulm in the Kingdom of Wurttemberg in the German Empire. His parents were Hermann Einstein, a salesman and engineer, and Pauline Koch. In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where Einstein's father and his uncle Jakob founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein und Cie, a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.

Einstein's special theory of relativity, published in 1905, describes how space and time are linked for objects that are moving at a consistent speed in a straight line. One of its consequences is that space and time are interwoven into a single continuum known as spacetime. Events that occur at the same time for one observer could occur at different times for another. As Einstein's fame spread, so did his interest in politics, especially his dedication to pacifism and Zionism.
