Marie Curie was a Polish and naturalized-French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity. She was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, the first person to win the Nobel Prize twice, and the only person to win the Nobel Prize in two scientific sciences. She was also the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris, and in 1995 she became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Pantheon in Paris.

She was born Maria Sklodowska on 7 November 1867 in Warsaw, in the Kingdom of Poland, then part of the Russian Empire. She studied at Warsaw's clandestine Flying University and began her practical scientific training in Warsaw. In 1891, aged 24, she followed her elder sister Bronislawa to study in Paris, where she earned her higher degrees and conducted her subsequent scientific work. In 1895 she married the French physicist Pierre Curie, and she shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 with Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel for their pioneering work developing the theory of radioactivity. In 1906 Pierre Curie died in a Paris street accident. Marie won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911.

Her achievements included developing the theory of radioactivity, the discovery of the techniques for isolating radioactive isotopes, and the discovery of two elements, polonium and radium. Under her direction, the world's first studies were conducted into the treatment of neoplasms using radioactive isotopes. She founded the Curie Institutes in Paris and in Warsaw, which remain major medical research centres. During World War I she developed mobile radiography units to provide X-ray services to field hospitals.

While a French citizen, Marie Curie was born and grew up in Warsaw, in what was then the Kingdom of Poland. She was the youngest of five children. Her parents were both teachers. Her father, Wladyslaw Sklodowski, taught mathematics and physics and was the principal of a gymnasium for boys. Her mother, Bronislawa, operated a prestigious Warsaw boarding school for girls. The family lost their property and financial well-being through patriotic involvements in Polish national uprisings.

Marie's early schooling was in a local school. She and her sister Bronislawa dreamed of going abroad to earn an official degree, but they were unable to afford the tuition fees. Marie worked as a tutor and governess, and during this time she continued to self-educate by reading books on physics, chemistry, and mathematics. When her sister had completed her medical degree and settled in Paris, she invited Marie to come live with her, which allowed Marie to earn a degree in physics in 1893 and another in mathematics in 1894 from the University of Paris.

Her discovery of polonium and radium, using techniques she developed for isolating radioactive isotopes, are regarded as her most important contributions to science. Curie developed methods for the separation of radium from radioactive residues in sufficient quantities to allow its characterization and the careful study of its properties, therapeutic properties in particular. During World War I, she and her daughter Irene brought X-ray equipment to military field hospitals. After the war, she lectured around the world and raised funds for research into radioactivity.
