New York City, often called New York, is the most populous city in the United States. With a 2020 population of 8,804,190 distributed over 300.46 square miles, New York City is also the most densely populated major city in the United States. Located at the southern tip of New York State, it constitutes the geographical and demographic center of both the Northeast megalopolis and the New York metropolitan area, the largest metropolitan area in the world by urban landmass.

New York City has five boroughs, each of which is a county of New York State. The five boroughs are Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, The Bronx, and Staten Island. Manhattan is the most densely populated borough and the center of the city's financial, cultural, and entertainment activities. Brooklyn is the most populous borough.

The city was founded by Dutch colonists in 1624 as a commercial trading post and named New Amsterdam in 1626. The settlement was renamed New York City in 1664 when it came under British control, named after the Duke of York who was granted the lands. By 1790, New York City had surpassed Philadelphia as the largest city in the United States.

New York City is a global financial center, home to the New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ, the two largest stock exchanges in the world by market capitalization. The city is also a major center for media, culture, fashion, and technology. Many major corporations are headquartered in New York City, including financial firms, media companies, and technology companies.

New York City is home to some of the world's most famous landmarks, including the Statue of Liberty, Times Square, Central Park, the Empire State Building, the Brooklyn Bridge, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The city receives more than 62 million visitors each year, making it one of the most visited cities in the world.

New York City is one of the most ethnically diverse cities in the world. More than 800 languages are spoken in New York City, making it the most linguistically diverse city in the world. The city is a major destination for immigrants from around the world, and it has been described as the world's most international city.

New York City is served by an extensive public transportation system, including the New York City Subway, one of the world's largest subway systems, as well as bus lines, commuter rail, and ferries. The city is also served by three major airports: John F. Kennedy International Airport, LaGuardia Airport, and Newark Liberty International Airport.
