Paris is the capital and most populous city of France. With an official estimated population of 2,102,650 residents in the city proper and 12,271,794 residents in the wider Ile-de-France metropolitan area, Paris is the fifth-most populous city in Europe and its largest metropolitan area in Europe. The city is a major railway, highway, and air-transport hub served by two international airports: Charles de Gaulle Airport, the second busiest airport in Europe, and Orly Airport.

Situated on the Seine River, in northern France, at the heart of the Ile-de-France region, Paris has been inhabited since approximately 8,000 BC, first settled by a Gallic tribe known as the Parisii. The Romans had taken over the area by 52 BC, establishing a city called Lutetia. The city was renamed Paris in 212 AD. The Vikings raided the city during the 9th century, but Paris survived and flourished during the medieval period as a centre of learning, commerce, and culture.

The area surrounding Paris was farmed for millennia, and the city grew from a small settlement on an island in the Seine River to become the capital of France. In the 12th century, the University of Paris was established, which quickly became the leading university of Europe. During the 13th century, some of the finest examples of medieval Gothic architecture were constructed in Paris.

Paris was the birthplace of the French Revolution in 1789 and was the capital of the First French Republic, the First French Empire, and subsequent French governments.

Landmarks of Paris include Notre-Dame Cathedral, which was built between 1163 and 1345, and is noted for its Gothic architecture and gargoyles. The city is also home to the Louvre Museum, the world's most visited museum, which houses more than 380,000 objects and displays 35,000 works of art. The Eiffel Tower was constructed as the entrance arch to the 1889 World's Fair and is now the most-visited paid monument in the world, with 6.91 million visitors in 2015.

The city is a global centre of art, fashion, gastronomy, and culture. Its fashion industry is considered second only to Milan's. Paris is also known for its cuisine, which the city considers a world art form. The city has the world's highest concentration of Michelin-starred restaurants per square kilometre in the world. Paris is also home to a number of notable universities and grandes ecoles, as well as public and private research organizations. The city is served by an extensive public transportation system, including the Paris Metro, the RER express rail network, and a network of bus lines.

Paris is a major tourist destination in Europe, and the most visited city in the world. More than 30 million tourists visit Paris each year. The city is home to more than 130 museums, including the Louvre, the Musee d'Orsay, and the Centre Georges Pompidou. Paris is also home to some of the world's most famous landmarks, such as the Arc de Triomphe, the Champs-Elysees, and the Palace of Versailles.
